WIP - F# compiler guide (#19881)
dotnet/docs: docs/fsharp/tutorials/fsharp-compiler/fsharp-compiler-guide.md

---
title: F# compiler guide
description: Learn about the F# compiler, its various phases, and terminology in the F# compiler codebase.

> ms.date: 8/6/2020

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ms.date: 08/06/2020
```

---

> # F# Compiler Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# F# compiler guide
```

> This guide discusses the F# Compiler source code and implementation from a technical point of view. The source code for the F# compiler and tools can be found at [`dotnet/fsharp` on GitHub.](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide discusses the F# compiler source code and implementation from a technical point of view. The source code for the F# compiler and tools can be found at [`dotnet/fsharp` on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp).
```

* The [F# Interactive tool](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/fsi), called `fsi`. A REPL for F# that supports execution and pretty-printing of F# code and results, loading F# script files, referencing assemblies, and referencing packages from NuGet.

* The [F# Compiler Service](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/fcs), called `FSharp.Compiler.Service` or abbreviated to FCS. It is mostly identical to `FSharp.Compiler.Private`, but critically contains the "Expression API" that allows other environments to inspect and operate on type-checked F# expressions (such as transpiling F# code to a different runtime target).

The `FSharp.Compiler.Private` is by far the largest of these components and contains nearly all logic that `fsc` and `fsi` use. It is the primary subject of this guide.

The F# compiler repositories are used to produce a range of different artifacts.  For the purposes of this
guide, the important ones are:

> ### Key Data Formats and Representations 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Key data formats and representations
```

The following are the key data formats and internal data representations of the F# compiler code in its various configurations:

* _Input source files_  Read as Unicode text, or binary for referenced assemblies.

> * _Input command line arguments_  See [CompileOptions.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/CompileOptions.fs) for the full  code implementing the arguments table.  Command line arguments are also accepted by the F# Compiler Service API in project specifications, and as optional input to F# Interactive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Input command-line arguments_  See [CompileOptions.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/CompileOptions.fs) for the full code implementing the arguments table. Command-line arguments are also accepted by the F# Compiler Service API in project specifications, and as optional input to F# Interactive.
```

* _Tokens_, see [pars.fsy](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/pars.fsy), [lex.fsl](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/lex.fsl), [lexhelp.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/lexhelp.fs) and related files.

> * _Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)_, see [SyntaxTree.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/SyntaxTree.fs), the untyped syntax tree resulting from parsing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)_, see [SyntaxTree.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/SyntaxTree.fs), the untyped syntax tree resulting from parsing.
```

* _Typed Abstract Syntax Tree (TAST)_, see [TypedTree.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/TypedTree.fs), [TypedTreeBasics.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/TypedTree.fs), [TypedTreeOps.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/TypedTreeOps.fs), and related files. The typed, bound syntax tree including both type/module definitions and their backing expressions, resulting from type checking and the subject of successive phases of optimization and representation change.

* _Type checking context/state_, see for example [`TcState` in CompileOps.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/CompileOps.fsi) and its constituent parts, particularly `TcEnv` in [TypeChecker.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/TypeChecker.fsi) and `NameResolutionEnv` in [NameResolution.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/NameResolution.fsi). A set of tables representing the available names, assemblies etc. in scope during type checking, plus associated information.

> * _Abstract IL_, the output of code generation, then used for binary generation, and the input format when reading .NET assemblies, see [`ILModuleDef` in il.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/il.fsi)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Abstract IL_, the output of code generation, then used for binary generation, and the input format when reading .NET assemblies, see [`ILModuleDef` in il.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/il.fsi).
```

* _The .NET Binary format_ (with added "pickled" F# Metadata resource), the final output of fsc.exe, see the ECMA 335 specification and the [ilread.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilread.fs) and [ilwrite.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fs) binary reader/generator implementations. The added F# metadata is stored in a binary resource, see [TypedTreePickle.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/TypedTreePickle.fs).

> * _The incrementally emitted .NET reflection assembly,_ the incremental output of fsi.exe. See [ilreflect.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilreflect.fs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _The incrementally emitted .NET reflection assembly,_ the incremental output of fsi.exe. See [ilreflect.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilreflect.fs).
```

* The incremental project build engine state in [IncrementalBuild.fsi](https://github.com/fsharp/FSharp.Compiler.Service/tree/master/src/fsharp/service/IncrementalBuild.fsi)/[IncrementalBuild.fs](https://github.com/fsharp/FSharp.Compiler.Service/tree/master/src/fsharp/service/IncrementalBuild.fs), a part of the F# Compiler Service API.

* The corresponding APIs wrapping and accessing these structures in the public-facing [`FSharp.Compiler.Service` API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/service) and [Symbol API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/symbols).

TODO CLEAN THESE UP

* The [F# Compiler Service Operations Queue](fsharp-compiler-service-queue.md), covered in the compiler service documentation (note: An older version of this functionality persists internally in the Microsoft\visualfsharp repository for the Visual F# Tools)

* The [F# Compiler Service Caches](fsharp-compiler-service-caches.md), covered in the compiler service documentation (note: An older version of this functionality persists internally in the Microsoft\visualfsharp repository for the Visual F# Tools)

END TODO

> ### Key Compiler Phases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Key compiler phases
```

> Below, you can see a diagram of how different phases of F# compiler work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a diagram of how different phases of F# compiler work:
```

* _Code generation_, see [IlxGen.fsi](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/IlxGen.fsi)/[IlxGen.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/IlxGen.fs). Accepts TAST nodes and produces Abstract IL nodes, sometimes applying optimizations.

* _Abstract IL code rewriting_, see [EraseClosures.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/ilx/EraseClosures.fs) and
  [EraseUnions.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/ilx/EraseUnions.fs). Eliminates some constructs by rewriting Abstract IL nodes.
  

> * _Binary emit_, see [ilwrite.fsi](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fsi)/[ilwrite.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fs). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Binary emit_, see [ilwrite.fsi](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fsi)/[ilwrite.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fs).
```

> * _Reflection-Emit_, see [ilreflect.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilreflect.fs). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Reflection-Emit_, see [ilreflect.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilreflect.fs).
```

The above are the internal phases and transformations used to build the following:

* _The F# Compiler Service API_, see the [Symbol API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/symbols) and [Service API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/service)

* _The F# Interactive Shell_, see [fsi.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fsi/fsi.fs).

* _The F# Compiler Shell_, see [fsc.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fsc.fs) and [fscmain.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fscmain.fs).

> ## Coding Standards and Idioms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Coding standards and idioms
```

## Error Messages and User-facing Text

### Adding Error Messages

Steffen Forkmann has written [an excellent introductory guide to adding a new error message](http://www.navision-blog.de/blog/2016/04/25/make-failure-great-again-a-small-journey-into-the-f-compiler/).

### Formatting User Text from TAST items

When formatting TAST objects such as ``TyconRef``s as text, you normally use either

* The functions in the ``NicePrint`` module such as ``NicePrint.outputTyconRef``.  These take
  a ``DisplayEnv`` that records the context in which a type was referenced, e.g. the open
  namespaces.  Opened namespaces are not shown in the displayed output.

* The ``DisplayName`` properties on the relevant object.  This drops the ``'n`` text that .NET
  adds to the compiled name of a type, and uses the F#-facing name for a type rather than
  the compiled name for a type (e.g. the name given in a ``CompiledName`` attribute).

* The functions such as ``Tastops.fullTextOfTyconRef``, used to show the full, qualified name of an item.

When formatting "info" objects, see the functions in the ``NicePrint`` module.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Notes on displaying types

> When displaying a type, you will normally want to "prettify" the type first (i.e. make the type "pretty"). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When displaying a type, you will normally want to "prettify" the type first (make the type "pretty").
```

* _Abstract IL code rewriting_, see [EraseClosures.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/ilx/EraseClosures.fs) and
  [EraseUnions.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/ilx/EraseUnions.fs). Eliminates some constructs by rewriting Abstract IL nodes.
  
* _Binary emit_, see [ilwrite.fsi](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fsi)/[ilwrite.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilwrite.fs).

* _Reflection-Emit_, see [ilreflect.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/absil/ilreflect.fs).

These and transformations used to build the following:

* _The F# Compiler Service API_, see the [Symbol API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/symbols) and [Service API](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/tree/master/src/fsharp/service)

* _The F# Interactive Shell_, see [fsi.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fsi/fsi.fs).

* _The F# Compiler Shell_, see [fsc.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fsc.fs) and [fscmain.fs](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/blob/master/src/fsharp/fscmain.fs).

> ## Coding standards and idioms

Reviewer 2: I don't think this table should be in these docs, which should be a taster and contain nothing that may rot over time.

Instead we should start a `docs` directory in dotnet/fsharp and put this table there (plus a copy of most of the above information)

> 

Reviewer 2: In fact I've been through all the information below and to be honest I think all of the rest should go in dotnet/fsharp.  docs/dotnet is not thr right place to maintain such highly technical information 

What's in the first section is ok.  But it should only be the slice we need to give a taster and which will not change at all.  Otherwise we are creating a doc set that will not stand the test of time.

| `tcref`              | Type constructor  reference (an `EntityRef`) |
| `tinst`              | Type instantiation |
| `tpenv`              | Type parameter environment, tracks the type parameters in scope during type checking |
| `ty`, `typ`                 |  Type, usually a Typed Tree type |
| `tys`, `typs`                 |  List of types, usually Typed Tree types |
| `typar`                 |  Type Parameter |
| `tyvar`                | Type Variable, usually referring to an IL type variable, the compiled form of an F# type parameter |
| `ucref`              | Union case reference, a reference to a Typed Tree node for a union case |
| `vref`              | Value reference, a reference to a Typed Tree node for a value |

| Phase Abbreviation             |   Meaning  |  
|:------------------------------|:-----------|
| `Syn`                  | Abstract Syntax Tree |
| `Tc`                  | Type-checker |
| `IL`                 | Abstract  IL = F# representation of .NET IL |
| `Ilx`                 | Extended Abstract IL = .NET IL plus a coulpe of contructs that get erased |

> ## Adding Error Messages

Reviewer 2: Likewise these belong in DEVNOTES.md or docs directory of dotnet/fsharp

* Analyzes a sequence expression and translates it into a state machine so that operating on sequences doesn't incur significant closure overhead

### Potential future optimizations: Better Inlining

Consider the following example:

```fsharp
let inline f k = (fun x -> k (x + 1))
let inline g k = (fun x -> k (x + 2))

let res = (f << g) id 1 // 4
```

Intermediate values that inherit from `FSharpFunc` are allocated at the call set of `res` to support function composition, even if the functions are marked as `inline`. Currently, if this overhead needs removal, you need to rewrite the code to be more like this:

```fsharp
let f x = x + 1
let g x = x + 2

let res = id 1 |> g |> f // 4
```

The downside of course being that the `id` function can't propagate to composed functions, meaning the code is now different despite yielding the same result.

More generally, any time a first-order function is passed as an argument to a second-order function, the first-order function is not inlined even if everything is marked as `inline`. This results in a performance penalty.

> ## Compiler Startup Performance

Reviewer 2: This section could perhaps stay (the topic is good), though I'd recommend a very short section on dotnet/docs pointing to a longer living document in dotnet/fsharp docs

decide not to bother continuing with the computation (it drops it on the floor)

The second can be interrupted via having `isResultObsolete` to the F# Compiler Service API return true.

### The F# Compiler Service Operations Queue

See [F# Compiler Service Queue](fsharp-compiler-service-queue.md).

### The F# Compiler Service Caches

See [F# Compiler Service Caches](fsharp-compiler-service-caches.md).

## Bootstrapping

The F# compiler is boostrapped. That is, an existing F# compiler is used to build a "proto" compiler from the current source code. That "proto" compiler is then used to compile itself, producing a "final" compiler. This ensures the final compiler is compiled with all relevant optimizations and fixes.

## FSharp.Build

TODO - Update, especially as it pertains to .NET Core/.NET SDK

`FSharp.Build.dll` and `Microsoft.FSharp.targets` give MSBuild support for F# projects (`.fsproj`). Although not strictly part of the F# compiler, these components are always found in F# tool distributions for Mono and Windows.

> ### How F# handles EmbeddedResource items differently to C# (details)

Reviewer 2: This should be removed completely
